README.md, before:

# CALIBER + PCP

> **Context Abstraction Layer Integrating Behavioral Extensible Runtime**  
> **+ Persistent Context Protocol**

A Postgres-native memory framework for AI agents, built as a multi-crate Rust workspace using pgrx.

**Version:** 0.4.4  
**Architecture:** Multi-crate ECS (Entity-Component-System)  
**Language:** Rust (pgrx)

---

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Prerequisites

- **Rust** 1.75+ (install via [rustup](https://rustup.rs/))
- **PostgreSQL** 18+ (for pgrx extension, optional for core development)
- **Cargo** (comes with Rust)

### WSL Notes (Windows)

- Clone and run the repo from the Linux filesystem (e.g. `/home/<user>/projects/...`), not `/mnt/c`, for reliable file watching and performance.
- Install build tooling and SSL headers if missing: `build-essential`, `pkg-config`, `libssl-dev` (and `clang` if you use crates that require it).
- If file watching is flaky, increase inotify limits (e.g. `fs.inotify.max_user_watches`).

### Build & Test (Without PostgreSQL)

```bash
# Clone the repository (replace with your repo URL)
git clone https://github.com/caliber-run/caliber.git
cd caliber

# Build all crates (excluding pgrx extension)
cargo build --workspace --exclude caliber-pg

# Run all tests (non-pgrx)
TMPDIR=$PWD/target/tmp cargo test --workspace --exclude caliber-pg

# Run with verbose output
TMPDIR=$PWD/target/tmp cargo test --workspace --exclude caliber-pg -- --nocapture

# Run clippy lints
TMPDIR=$PWD/target/tmp cargo clippy --workspace --exclude caliber-pg -- -D warnings

# (Optional) Install JS deps for SDK/landing work
bun install
```

### Build with PostgreSQL (Full Extension)

```bash
# Install pgrx CLI
cargo install cargo-pgrx

# Initialize pgrx (downloads and configures PostgreSQL)
cargo pgrx init

# Build the extension
cargo build -p caliber-pg --release

# Package for deployment
cargo pgrx package -p caliber-pg

cargo pgrx test pg18 --package caliber-pg
```

Note: `openapi.json` is CI-generated and not committed.

Use `./scripts/test.sh` to run clippy, workspace tests, and pg18 pgrx tests in one pass.

### Hello World (Postgres, low-level API)

Requires pgvector and the `caliber_pg` extension to be installed in the target Postgres instance.

```bash
psql -c "CREATE EXTENSION vector;"
psql -c "CREATE EXTENSION caliber_pg;"
psql -c "SELECT caliber_init();"
psql -c "SELECT caliber_trajectory_get(caliber_trajectory_create('hello-world', NULL, NULL));"
psql -c "WITH t AS (SELECT caliber_trajectory_create('hello-world', NULL, NULL) AS id) SELECT caliber_scope_create(t.id, 'scope-1', NULL, 800) FROM t;"
psql -c "WITH t AS (SELECT caliber_trajectory_create('hello-world', NULL, NULL) AS id) SELECT caliber_scope_get_current(t.id) FROM t;"
```

Config is required for runtime operations; see `docs/QUICK_REFERENCE.md` for the full JSON shape.

---

## 📁 Project Structure

```
caliber/
├── caliber-core/        # Entity types (data only, no behavior)
├── caliber-storage/     # Storage trait + mock implementation
├── caliber-pcp/         # Validation, checkpoints, recovery
├── caliber-dsl/         # DSL parser → CaliberConfig
├── caliber-pg/          # pgrx extension (requires PostgreSQL)
├── caliber-api/         # REST/gRPC/WebSocket API server
├── caliber-tui/         # Terminal user interface
├── caliber-test-utils/  # Test generators, fixtures, assertions
├── caliber-sdk/         # TypeScript SDK for REST/WebSocket APIs
├── examples/            # Example programs and usage patterns
├── docs/                # Specification documents
├── fuzz/                # Fuzz testing targets (requires nightly)
├── docker/              # Docker configs and compose files
├── charts/              # Helm charts for Kubernetes
├── terraform/           # Infrastructure as Code (AWS, Azure, GCP)
├── landing/             # Marketing website (Astro + Svelte)
├── .github/             # CI/CD workflows and issue templates
├── Cargo.toml           # Workspace manifest
├── DEVLOG.md            # Development timeline
├── BENCHMARKS.md        # Performance benchmarks and comparisons
├── CONTRIBUTING.md      # Contribution guidelines
├── SECURITY.md          # Security policy and vulnerability reporting
└── README.md            # This file
```

---

## 🏗️ Architecture

CALIBER uses ECS (Entity-Component-System) architecture:

- **Entities** (caliber-core): Pure data structures — Trajectory, Scope, Artifact, Note, Turn
- **Components** (caliber-*): Behavior via traits — storage, validation, DSL compilation, API orchestration
- **System** (caliber-pg): Wires everything together in PostgreSQL

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                      CALIBER + PCP                              │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│  CaliberConfig (user-provided, no defaults)                     │
│                              │                                  │
│  PCP Protocol Layer (validation, checkpoints, harm reduction)   │
│                              │                                  │
│  CALIBER Components (ECS)                                       │
│  caliber-core │ caliber-storage │ caliber-pcp │ caliber-dsl      │
│                              │                                  │
│  pgrx Direct Storage (heap ops, no SQL in hot path)             │
│                              │                                  │
│  PostgreSQL Storage Engine                                      │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

---

## 🔑 Key Features

| Feature | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| **Hierarchical Memory** | Trajectory → Scope → Artifact → Note |
| **No SQL in Hot Path** | Direct pgrx heap operations for performance |
| **VAL (Vector Abstraction)** | Provider-agnostic embeddings, any dimension |
| **Multi-Agent Support** | Locks, messages, delegation, handoffs |
| **Custom DSL** | Declarative configuration language |
| **PCP Harm Reduction** | Validation, checkpoints, contradiction detection |
| **Zero Defaults** | All configuration explicit — framework, not product |

---

## 📊 Test Coverage

Run `./scripts/test.sh` for the full local test matrix (clippy + workspace tests + pg18 pgrx tests).
Set `DB_TESTS=1` with `CALIBER_DB_*` to include DB-backed API tests; the script bootstraps schema via `caliber_init` or the SQL bootstrap. Agent DB tests require the `caliber_pg` extension to be installed in that Postgres instance.

---

## 📚 Documentation

| Document | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| [CALIBER_PCP_SPEC.md](docs/CALIBER_PCP_SPEC.md) | Core specification |
| [DSL_PARSER.md](docs/DSL_PARSER.md) | Lexer, parser, AST |
| [LLM_SERVICES.md](docs/LLM_SERVICES.md) | VAL + summarization |
| [MULTI_AGENT_COORDINATION.md](docs/MULTI_AGENT_COORDINATION.md) | Agent coordination |
| [DEPENDENCY_GRAPH.md](docs/DEPENDENCY_GRAPH.md) | Type system reference |
| [QUICK_REFERENCE.md](docs/QUICK_REFERENCE.md) | Cheat sheet |
| [BENCHMARKS.md](BENCHMARKS.md) | Performance benchmarks and comparisons |
| [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) | Contribution guidelines and workflow |
| [SECURITY.md](SECURITY.md) | Security policy and vulnerability reporting |
| [OPERATIONS_CHECKLIST.md](docs/OPERATIONS_CHECKLIST.md) | Production readiness checklist |
| [DEVLOG.md](DEVLOG.md) | Development timeline |
| [examples/README.md](examples/README.md) | Example programs and usage patterns |

---

## 🎯 Usage Example (Rust, high-level)

```rust
use caliber_core::{
    ContextAssembler,
    ContextPackage,
    CaliberConfig,
    CaliberResult,
    ContextPersistence,
    RetryConfig,
    SectionPriorities,
    ValidationMode,
};
use std::time::Duration;
use uuid::Uuid;

fn main() -> CaliberResult<()> {
    // Configuration is REQUIRED — no defaults
    let config = CaliberConfig {
        token_budget: 8000,
        checkpoint_retention: 5,
        stale_threshold: Duration::from_secs(86400 * 30),
        contradiction_threshold: 0.85,
        context_window_persistence: ContextPersistence::Ttl(Duration::from_secs(86400)),
        validation_mode: ValidationMode::OnMutation,
        section_priorities: SectionPriorities {
            user: 100,
            system: 90,
            artifacts: 80,
            notes: 70,
            history: 60,
            custom: vec![],
        },
        embedding_provider: None,
        summarization_provider: None,
        llm_retry_config: RetryConfig {
            max_retries: 3,
            initial_backoff: Duration::from_millis(200),
            max_backoff: Duration::from_secs(2),
            backoff_multiplier: 2.0,
        },
        lock_timeout: Duration::from_secs(30),
        message_retention: Duration::from_secs(86400),
        delegation_timeout: Duration::from_secs(3600),
    };

    let assembler = ContextAssembler::new(config)?;
    let trajectory_id = Uuid::now_v7();
    let scope_id = Uuid::now_v7();
    let pkg = ContextPackage::new(trajectory_id, scope_id)
        .with_user_input("Summarize the last scope.".to_string());

    let window = assembler.assemble(pkg)?;
    println!("Assembled {} sections", window.sections.len());
    Ok(())
}
```

---

## 🧪 Running Tests

```bash
# All workspace tests (excludes pgrx extension)
cargo test --workspace --exclude caliber-pg

# Specific crate
cargo test -p caliber-core

# Property tests only
cargo test --workspace --exclude caliber-pg -- prop_

# With output
cargo test --workspace --exclude caliber-pg -- --nocapture

# Examples (separate from workspace tests)
cargo test --examples

# Fuzz tests (requires nightly Rust)
cargo +nightly fuzz run lexer_fuzz -- -max_total_time=60
cargo +nightly fuzz run parser_fuzz -- -max_total_time=60

# pgrx extension tests (requires PostgreSQL)
cargo pgrx test -p caliber-pg
```

**Fuzz Testing Results:**
- 462,947 adversarial inputs tested
- 0 crashes (100% robust)
- Validates DSL parser production-readiness

---

## 💡 Examples

See [examples/README.md](examples/README.md) for detailed usage examples:

- **basic_trajectory.rs** - Complete workflow: Trajectory → Scope → Artifacts → Turns → Notes
- More examples coming soon: context assembly, multi-agent coordination, vector search, DSL configuration

Run examples with:
```bash
cargo run --example basic_trajectory
```

---

## 🔧 Development

### Philosophy

CALIBER is a **framework**, not a product. Every value must be explicitly configured:

```rust
// ❌ WRONG - We don't do this
const DEFAULT_TOKEN_BUDGET: i32 = 8000;

// ✅ RIGHT - User must configure
pub struct CaliberConfig {
    pub token_budget: i32,  // Required, no default
}
```

### Code Standards

- Use `CaliberResult<T>` for all fallible operations
- No `unwrap()` in production code — use `?` operator
- All public items have doc comments
- Property tests for correctness properties

---

## 📄 License

This specification is released for implementation. Build cool shit. 🚀

Commit message:

chore: remove outdated review bot configurations and update documentation
- Deleted `.coderabbit.yml` and `.greptile/config.yml` as part of the cleanup of legacy review bot configurations.
- Updated README to clarify that `openapi.json` is now committed and regenerated by CI, ensuring accurate documentation of the workflow.
- Enhanced CHANGELOG and DEVLOG with recent CI improvements, including documentation checks and OpenAPI validation, to reflect the latest changes in the project.

These changes streamline the configuration files and improve documentation clarity.

README.md, after:

# CALIBER + PCP

> **Context Abstraction Layer Integrating Behavioral Extensible Runtime**  
> **+ Persistent Context Protocol**

A Postgres-native memory framework for AI agents, built as a multi-crate Rust workspace using pgrx.

**Version:** 0.4.4  
**Architecture:** Multi-crate ECS (Entity-Component-System)  
**Language:** Rust (pgrx)

---

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Prerequisites

- **Rust** 1.75+ (install via [rustup](https://rustup.rs/))
- **PostgreSQL** 18+ (for pgrx extension, optional for core development)
- **Cargo** (comes with Rust)

### WSL Notes (Windows)

- Clone and run the repo from the Linux filesystem (e.g. `/home/<user>/projects/...`), not `/mnt/c`, for reliable file watching and performance.
- Install build tooling and SSL headers if missing: `build-essential`, `pkg-config`, `libssl-dev` (and `clang` if you use crates that require it).
- If file watching is flaky, increase inotify limits (e.g. `fs.inotify.max_user_watches`).

### Build & Test (Without PostgreSQL)

```bash
# Clone the repository (replace with your repo URL)
git clone https://github.com/caliber-run/caliber.git
cd caliber

# Build all crates (excluding pgrx extension)
cargo build --workspace --exclude caliber-pg

# Run all tests (non-pgrx)
TMPDIR=$PWD/target/tmp cargo test --workspace --exclude caliber-pg

# Run with verbose output
TMPDIR=$PWD/target/tmp cargo test --workspace --exclude caliber-pg -- --nocapture

# Run clippy lints
TMPDIR=$PWD/target/tmp cargo clippy --workspace --exclude caliber-pg -- -D warnings

# (Optional) Install JS deps for SDK/landing work
bun install
```

### Build with PostgreSQL (Full Extension)

```bash
# Install pgrx CLI
cargo install cargo-pgrx

# Initialize pgrx (downloads and configures PostgreSQL)
cargo pgrx init

# Build the extension
cargo build -p caliber-pg --release

# Package for deployment
cargo pgrx package -p caliber-pg

cargo pgrx test pg18 --package caliber-pg
```

Note: `openapi.json` is committed; CI regenerates it and fails on drift.

Use `./scripts/test.sh` to run clippy, workspace tests, and pg18 pgrx tests in one pass.

### Hello World (Postgres, low-level API)

Requires pgvector and the `caliber_pg` extension to be installed in the target Postgres instance.

```bash
psql -c "CREATE EXTENSION vector;"
psql -c "CREATE EXTENSION caliber_pg;"
psql -c "SELECT caliber_init();"
psql -c "SELECT caliber_trajectory_get(caliber_trajectory_create('hello-world', NULL, NULL));"
psql -c "WITH t AS (SELECT caliber_trajectory_create('hello-world', NULL, NULL) AS id) SELECT caliber_scope_create(t.id, 'scope-1', NULL, 800) FROM t;"
psql -c "WITH t AS (SELECT caliber_trajectory_create('hello-world', NULL, NULL) AS id) SELECT caliber_scope_get_current(t.id) FROM t;"
```

Config is required for runtime operations; see `docs/QUICK_REFERENCE.md` for the full JSON shape.

---

## 📁 Project Structure

```
caliber/
├── caliber-core/        # Entity types (data only, no behavior)
├── caliber-storage/     # Storage trait + mock implementation
├── caliber-pcp/         # Validation, checkpoints, recovery
├── caliber-dsl/         # DSL parser → CaliberConfig
├── caliber-pg/          # pgrx extension (requires PostgreSQL)
├── caliber-api/         # REST/gRPC/WebSocket API server
├── caliber-tui/         # Terminal user interface
├── caliber-test-utils/  # Test generators, fixtures, assertions
├── caliber-sdk/         # TypeScript SDK for REST/WebSocket APIs
├── examples/            # Example programs and usage patterns
├── docs/                # Specification documents
├── fuzz/                # Fuzz testing targets (requires nightly)
├── docker/              # Docker configs and compose files
├── charts/              # Helm charts for Kubernetes
├── terraform/           # Infrastructure as Code (AWS, Azure, GCP)
├── landing/             # Marketing website (Astro + Svelte)
├── .github/             # CI/CD workflows and issue templates
├── .coderabbit.yaml     # CodeRabbit review bot config
├── greptile.json        # Greptile review bot config
├── Cargo.toml           # Workspace manifest
├── DEVLOG.md            # Development timeline
├── BENCHMARKS.md        # Performance benchmarks and comparisons
├── CONTRIBUTING.md      # Contribution guidelines
├── SECURITY.md          # Security policy and vulnerability reporting
└── README.md            # This file
```

---

## 🏗️ Architecture

CALIBER uses ECS (Entity-Component-System) architecture:

- **Entities** (caliber-core): Pure data structures — Trajectory, Scope, Artifact, Note, Turn
- **Components** (caliber-*): Behavior via traits — storage, validation, DSL compilation, API orchestration
- **System** (caliber-pg): Wires everything together in PostgreSQL

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                      CALIBER + PCP                              │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│  CaliberConfig (user-provided, no defaults)                     │
│                              │                                  │
│  PCP Protocol Layer (validation, checkpoints, harm reduction)   │
│                              │                                  │
│  CALIBER Components (ECS)                                       │
│  caliber-core │ caliber-storage │ caliber-pcp │ caliber-dsl      │
│                              │                                  │
│  pgrx Direct Storage (heap ops, no SQL in hot path)             │
│                              │                                  │
│  PostgreSQL Storage Engine                                      │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

---

## 🔑 Key Features

| Feature | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| **Hierarchical Memory** | Trajectory → Scope → Artifact → Note |
| **No SQL in Hot Path** | Direct pgrx heap operations for performance |
| **VAL (Vector Abstraction)** | Provider-agnostic embeddings, any dimension |
| **Multi-Agent Support** | Locks, messages, delegation, handoffs |
| **Custom DSL** | Declarative configuration language |
| **PCP Harm Reduction** | Validation, checkpoints, contradiction detection |
| **Zero Defaults** | All configuration explicit — framework, not product |

---

## 📊 Test Coverage

Run `./scripts/test.sh` for the full local test matrix (clippy + workspace tests + pg18 pgrx tests).
Set `DB_TESTS=1` with `CALIBER_DB_*` to include DB-backed API tests; the script bootstraps schema via `caliber_init` or the SQL bootstrap. Agent DB tests require the `caliber_pg` extension to be installed in that Postgres instance.

---

## 📚 Documentation

| Document | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| [CALIBER_PCP_SPEC.md](docs/CALIBER_PCP_SPEC.md) | Core specification |
| [DSL_PARSER.md](docs/DSL_PARSER.md) | Lexer, parser, AST |
| [LLM_SERVICES.md](docs/LLM_SERVICES.md) | VAL + summarization |
| [MULTI_AGENT_COORDINATION.md](docs/MULTI_AGENT_COORDINATION.md) | Agent coordination |
| [DEPENDENCY_GRAPH.md](docs/DEPENDENCY_GRAPH.md) | Type system reference |
| [QUICK_REFERENCE.md](docs/QUICK_REFERENCE.md) | Cheat sheet |
| [BENCHMARKS.md](BENCHMARKS.md) | Performance benchmarks and comparisons |
| [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) | Contribution guidelines and workflow |
| [SECURITY.md](SECURITY.md) | Security policy and vulnerability reporting |
| [OPERATIONS_CHECKLIST.md](docs/OPERATIONS_CHECKLIST.md) | Production readiness checklist |
| [DEVLOG.md](DEVLOG.md) | Development timeline |
| [examples/README.md](examples/README.md) | Example programs and usage patterns |

---

## 🎯 Usage Example (Rust, high-level)

```rust
use caliber_core::{
    ContextAssembler,
    ContextPackage,
    CaliberConfig,
    CaliberResult,
    ContextPersistence,
    RetryConfig,
    SectionPriorities,
    ValidationMode,
};
use std::time::Duration;
use uuid::Uuid;

fn main() -> CaliberResult<()> {
    // Configuration is REQUIRED — no defaults
    let config = CaliberConfig {
        token_budget: 8000,
        checkpoint_retention: 5,
        stale_threshold: Duration::from_secs(86400 * 30),
        contradiction_threshold: 0.85,
        context_window_persistence: ContextPersistence::Ttl(Duration::from_secs(86400)),
        validation_mode: ValidationMode::OnMutation,
        section_priorities: SectionPriorities {
            user: 100,
            system: 90,
            artifacts: 80,
            notes: 70,
            history: 60,
            custom: vec![],
        },
        embedding_provider: None,
        summarization_provider: None,
        llm_retry_config: RetryConfig {
            max_retries: 3,
            initial_backoff: Duration::from_millis(200),
            max_backoff: Duration::from_secs(2),
            backoff_multiplier: 2.0,
        },
        lock_timeout: Duration::from_secs(30),
        message_retention: Duration::from_secs(86400),
        delegation_timeout: Duration::from_secs(3600),
    };

    let assembler = ContextAssembler::new(config)?;
    let trajectory_id = Uuid::now_v7();
    let scope_id = Uuid::now_v7();
    let pkg = ContextPackage::new(trajectory_id, scope_id)
        .with_user_input("Summarize the last scope.".to_string());

    let window = assembler.assemble(pkg)?;
    println!("Assembled {} sections", window.sections.len());
    Ok(())
}
```

---

## 🧪 Running Tests

```bash
# All workspace tests (excludes pgrx extension)
cargo test --workspace --exclude caliber-pg

# Specific crate
cargo test -p caliber-core

# Property tests only
cargo test --workspace --exclude caliber-pg -- prop_

# With output
cargo test --workspace --exclude caliber-pg -- --nocapture

# Examples (separate from workspace tests)
cargo test --examples

# Fuzz tests (requires nightly Rust)
cargo +nightly fuzz run lexer_fuzz -- -max_total_time=60
cargo +nightly fuzz run parser_fuzz -- -max_total_time=60

# pgrx extension tests (requires PostgreSQL)
cargo pgrx test -p caliber-pg
```

**Fuzz Testing Results:**
- 462,947 adversarial inputs tested
- 0 crashes (100% robust)
- Validates DSL parser production-readiness

---

## 💡 Examples

See [examples/README.md](examples/README.md) for detailed usage examples:

- **basic_trajectory.rs** - Complete workflow: Trajectory → Scope → Artifacts → Turns → Notes
- More examples coming soon: context assembly, multi-agent coordination, vector search, DSL configuration

Run examples with:
```bash
cargo run --example basic_trajectory
```

---

## 🔧 Development

### Philosophy

CALIBER is a **framework**, not a product. Every value must be explicitly configured:

```rust
// ❌ WRONG - We don't do this
const DEFAULT_TOKEN_BUDGET: i32 = 8000;

// ✅ RIGHT - User must configure
pub struct CaliberConfig {
    pub token_budget: i32,  // Required, no default
}
```

### Code Standards

- Use `CaliberResult<T>` for all fallible operations
- No `unwrap()` in production code — use `?` operator
- All public items have doc comments
- Property tests for correctness properties

---

## 📄 License

This specification is released for implementation. Build cool shit. 🚀
