docs/CAL_MCP_RELATIONSHIP.md, before:

# cal.toml vs mcp.json Relationship

## cal.toml (Compile-Time Contract)

`cal.toml` is the **capability registry** for a CALIBER pack:
- Declares adapters (database connections)
- Declares agents and their profiles
- Declares toolsets and their tools
- Declares policies (summarization, lifecycle)

Example:
```toml
[tools.prompts.search]
kind = "prompt"
prompt_md = "tools/prompts/search.md"
```

**cal.toml is authoritative for what capabilities exist.**

## mcp.json (Runtime IO Wiring)

`mcp.json` is the **runtime tool configuration** for MCP-compatible clients:
- Maps tool IDs to transport endpoints
- Configures authentication
- Wires external tools to agent runtimes

**mcp.json SHOULD reference tool IDs declared in cal.toml.**
No new capabilities at runtime - only wiring.

## Relationship

```
cal.toml (compile-time)
    ↓ declares tools
pack compose
    ↓ validates tool references
CompiledConfig
    ↓ runtime deploys
mcp.json (runtime)
    ↓ wires declared tools to endpoints
Agent Runtime
```

## Enforcement

Pack compose validates that all tool references resolve.
Tools referenced in mcp.json but not declared in cal.toml are invalid.

Commit message:

feat: integrate DSL and pack functionality into the API
- Added new endpoints for validating, parsing, compiling, composing, and deploying DSL and pack configurations.
- Enhanced the TUI to support DSL and pack operations, including keybindings for validation, composition, compilation, and deployment.
- Updated the API client to handle new DSL/pack requests and responses.
- Introduced a pack tool registry and routing hints in the DSL compiler for improved runtime capabilities.
- Documented the new features and their usage in the relevant markdown files.

These changes enhance the API's capabilities and improve the user experience in the TUI by providing comprehensive support for DSL and pack management.

docs/CAL_MCP_RELATIONSHIP.md, after:

# cal.toml vs mcp.json Relationship

## cal.toml (Compile-Time Contract)

`cal.toml` is the **capability registry** for a CALIBER pack:
- Declares adapters (database connections)
- Declares agents and their profiles
- Declares toolsets and their tools
- Declares policies (summarization, lifecycle)

Example:
```toml
[tools.prompts.search]
kind = "prompt"
prompt_md = "tools/prompts/search.md"
```

**cal.toml is authoritative for what capabilities exist.**

## mcp.json (Runtime IO Wiring)

`mcp.json` is the **runtime tool configuration** for MCP-compatible clients:
- Maps tool IDs to transport endpoints
- Configures authentication
- Wires external tools to agent runtimes

**mcp.json SHOULD reference tool IDs declared in cal.toml.**
No new capabilities at runtime - only wiring.

## Relationship

```
cal.toml (compile-time)
    ↓ declares tools
pack compose
    ↓ validates tool references
CompiledConfig
    ↓ runtime deploys
mcp.json (runtime)
    ↓ wires declared tools to endpoints
Agent Runtime
```

## Enforcement

Current enforcement behavior:

- Pack compose validates that all tool references resolve.
- MCP is strict pack-only by default.
- MCP tools are sourced from the active deployed pack (`CompiledConfig.tools`).
- Toolset scoping is supported:
  - `POST /mcp/tools/list` accepts `x-agent-name` or `x-agent-id`.
  - `POST /mcp/tools/call` accepts `arguments.agent_name` or `arguments.agent_id`.
  - When agent IDs are provided, MCP resolves the runtime agent record and uses
    `agent_type` as the pack agent name for toolset scoping.
- Active pack inspection is available at:
  - `GET /api/v1/pack/inspect`
  - Includes effective provider selection fields for embeddings/summarization.

Operational notes:

- If no pack is deployed, MCP tool listing is empty and tool calls fail in strict mode.
- Strictness can be relaxed via `CALIBER_MCP_STRICT_PACK=0` (fallbacks re-enabled).
